what we really need to do is get the
government out of education and people
think oh that's terrible because
if it wasn't for the government
providing education nobody would be
educated that's not true
notice how he's shifting the goal posts
in a subtle way here
nobody would claim that if government
funding for education were
cancelled that nobody nobody
would have access to education that
there wouldn't be any education at all
right the question is how do the poor
have access to education how do the
poorest of the poor
have access education how do you provide
universal education and when i say
universal i do not just mean
that it is accessible to the rich and
poor alike i mean that it is the same
for each and every one that muslims and
christians and jews are all forced
to learn the theory of evolution
something they may not want to pay for
if they're in a clientelistic
relationship where they're paying for
individual tutors the way people did in
the in the dark ages
not not everyone wants to learn you know
algebra
there are a lot of things people are not
going to pay to learn
if the government's role in education
becomes zero
they may not even learn to brush their
teeth and wash their hands and use
condoms
where babies come from how aids is
spread what to do with an unwanted
pregnancy there's a whole lot of
information that's going to disappear
from education when you when you
eliminate the universality
of education universal education isn't
just
about providing education to the poor
it's about providing
the same education to the rich and poor
alike
it's about providing the same education
to
sophisticated secular urban
people and perhaps not so sophisticated
rural deeply religious people it's about
providing the same education
to immigrants who may have just arrived
in your country from saudi arabia and
iran
as people have lived in your country for
400 years
the government did two things they made
a college degree very expensive and then
they made it
practically worthless because before the
government started subsidizing college
fewer people actually went because only
the people that could really benefit
from the degree
went and so then if you had a college
degree it actually meant something in
the marketplace
now since everybody goes to school
because it's you know you get the money
from the government
everybody's got a college degree they
mean nothing both
on the left and on the right
we often have to deal with this pattern
of people believing in an abstract
principle
and then being drawn in step by step
to refuse to consider to reject
the evidence before them the evidence of
real experience
in the real world because they'd prefer
to believe
in the abstract principle and this makes
the political sphere step by step
more and more like a religion so
to critique the left for just half a
second before i critique the right wing
on this
this particular issue i've spoken to so
many left-wingers
who just wanted to assert to me the
abstract principle
that making heroin and cocaine
completely legal and decriminalized
would solve
the drug addiction problem and that this
had already happened in switzerland
and portugal switzerland and portugal
i've had this conversation several times
with left wingers
now i don't respond by telling them that
the abstract principle
they believe in is wrong like i don't
respond by telling them
santa claus ain't got no beard
i respond by trying to direct their
attention to empirical reality
to real facts to real history i very
often small questions
okay have you looked at what the drug
laws
in switzerland actually are have you
looked
at you know what the laws and procedures
in portugal really are and have you
looked at
the outcomes have you looked at the
results like there are
two different types of misconceptions
here like one misconception would be
that the situation with drug addiction
in portugal
is really so much better than the
situation in france
and these are comparable countries
they're both in western europe they both
have a large-scale
drug addiction problem right but then
there's also the misconception
what do you think actually happens when
drug addicts are
arrested and taken into court in
portugal and of course very often
they didn't even know that happened they
believed in a myth
they believed in not just a story a
made-up story that serves
to vindicate this abstract principle the
same way religious people
make up a story so they can believe in
jesus or moses or any of the
mythological heroes of
of hinduism or buddhism right the
problem isn't with
the detail of the story the problem
isn't with whether or not santa claus is
a beard
the problem is the psychological effect
of this story in your mind that it digs
you into
this false sense of certainty of the
abstract principle and
certainly the abstract principle they
won't let go of it
so my experience is when talking to
left-wingers about
drug policy they very quickly just
become flustered and leave the room or
start shouting me or shut down
no matter how helpful i am and just
trying to say okay well let's talk what
are the laws
in switzerland let's talk about that
stuff let's let's let's actually discuss
the they cannot hear it they cannot
participate in the conversation
i'm threatening their faith
every single time i've spoken to
libertarians
anarcho-capitalists or misc
right-wingers
about these delusions that you could
improve
american education by eliminating all
government funding in the same way they
very very quickly
become flustered and leave the room they
can't talk about these things
they can make a completely general
statement of principle
such as uh in the past
government wasn't involved in funding or
regulating education at all
and that was just fine so in the future
we could go back to having that kind of
oh so are you you talking about the
1840s
do you do you want to talk about how
education functioned
in the 1840s and why it changed between
the 1840s
and the 1860s in the 1890s can we
actually talk about this
and the reply is no no no no no
as soon as you take a step into
empirical reality to real
world details they can't cope with it
they have to shut the conversation down
they have to run away
because what they believe in it's
neither a solution for the problems of
this world nor is even
an analysis of the problems this world
it's an abstract principle
that's as far removed from the real
world as the belief in
god and hell and heaven you know
if it's just like saying if you know the
government needs to provide food no we
get great food from the farmers
you know what what about our cell phones
as a government no it's it's
it's the free market everyone's getting
government funding or government
administration no i don't think the
government should be involved in it i
think at all
no i think so what about poor people who
don't have an internet connection or
books poor people eat poor people have
housing poor people have clothing they
get plenty of things from the free
market
whatever you value the free market is
going to provide it for you
in a better quality at a lower cost and
if
if we got the government out of public
education
people would pay to send their kids to
school but
it wouldn't cost nearly as much and
taxes would be a lot lower
because you wouldn't have to pay taxes
to support the public schools
you can buy tuition at a private school
that would be a fraction of the cost
so he has revealed here the abstract
principle
that he believes in and his belief is
unshakable
it is not going to falter it is not
going to adapt it is not going to change
in response to empirically real evidence
about how the real world works
and he didn't arrive at these
conclusions through the
comparative analysis of evidence that
exists here
in the real world of which we have a
whole lot if you're talking about the
history of education
what education policies work this
abstract principle evil isn't
that um the free market will always
deliver the service to you the customer
at a lower price and a higher quality
what what's cheaper
sending a letter by u.s postal service
by mail
or sending it by federal express by ups
by dhl by private courier
you really can't think of a single
example
of a service that's provided by the
government
more cheaply and more efficiently than a
private
sector alternate really really
let's stay within the realm of education
you can't think of any example anywhere
in the world
where the government is providing high
school education
at a lower price than private schools
than private for-profit schools
not schools run by a religious charity
at a loss that exists that can be
cheaper
than the government when the catholics
go to cambodia
and provide free education to cambodian
orphans if only they'll convert to
catholicism
when the muslims want to convert people
to islam
they run education on a religious
non-profit that's another story
that wasn't the comparison you were
making you weren't making a comparison
to charity
you were making comparison between
government provided services
and the free market and and you know
it seems to me even if we just limited
ourselves to the history of the last 100
years
we didn't go back any further it seems
to me there were a whole lot of
countries where just due to war poverty
chaos the collapse of government from
one period
there have been periods of time where
there was no
positive role for government and
education
cambodia for example far off
do we look back on that period when
there was really no government
involvement education
in cambodia was as a golden age for
education no
no any any government anywhere in the
world
asia europe africa just within the last
100 years not even going back to
the way education was transformed
between the 1840s 1860s
1890s no
this line of reasoning he's engaged in
all right it is just as pious as the
most pious
christian it's telling you to close your
eyes
against the things of this world because
what he believes in
are not things that can be seen but
things that remain
unseen they are magical axioms
always just outside your field of vision
if only you'd close your eyes and
believe
you can disregard the mountains of
evidence that what he's saying
is just plain wrong because now you
would have
college you know you know schools
competing against each other
who can provide the best education at
the lowest possible cost okay but what
do you do about a homeless family a kid
whose
parents or mom is homeless or something
like that there are examples where they
wouldn't
there would be innocent children right
six years old ready to go to
kindergarten who
has no money for education there's
always going to be
schools will give out scholarships i
mean there's private charities i mean
it's not that the government has a
monopoly on charity
so again he's shifting the goalposts
here
right oh well who's going to provide
education to the poor
uh charity charity is not the free
market
you are making an argument on behalf of
the free market against
government intervention this would be
just as ridiculous as saying what do you
mean in cambodia
they had great education provided to
them in refugee camps by the united
nations
yeah the united nations isn't government
it's an international coalition of
governments what do you want
this is a non-argument this is a
self-defeating
argument but just let's just think
through a few further steps here
you say charity what is that going to be
a charity of
secular intellectuals
what if it's a muslim charity what if
it's a charity
from iran what if it's a charity from
saudi arabia
what if it's a charity coming into the
ghettos of the united states of america
or into small towns to reach out to the
poor and hopeless there
saying hey you want a chance to become a
dentist or a doctor
or a nurse you have to convert to our
faith and come to our school
learn by our textbooks and play by our
rules what then
the question isn't just who provides
education
who provides universal education
it's a tremendous struggle to allow
the charity section to participate in
providing education
at all because the government has to
intervene
constantly to force the catholic schools
and the mormon schools and the jewish
orthodox schools
to all play by the same rules to all
teach the same curriculum to teach
things like how to use a condom and the
theory of evolution
and the geological history that the
world wasn't created in seven days
all kinds of things that they don't want
to teach and that also
the students may not want to learn all
right
one of the most fundamental delusions
about uh free market mechanisms
is that they can still work when you're
talking about a product
that nobody wants to buy
a large part of education is
authoritarian
is coercive is forcing people to learn
things
that they don't perceive it as being in
their best interest to learn that's why
free market mechanisms
can never be the solution to this riddle
the same way people don't want to
pay a whole lot of money out of their
own pocket just to handle say
sewage treatment as long as the sewage
is somewhere down river it's not
affecting their own life perfect
personally they don't want to adopt and
take responsibility to take on that cost
even that though it's really not quite
the same thing
as asking say the nazis
in germany right after world war ii
to teach their own children about the
terrible atrocities
they themselves committed what what do
you think would have happened
when the rubble was still on the ground
after world war
ii if you allowed the next generation of
germans
to just be educated by the free market
if you just allowed parents
to employ whatever tutors they wanted to
if you allowed
people to just pay for whatever lesson
they wanted do you think a whole bunch
of um
recently returned war criminals would
have paid
to establish the universal system of
education that has basically created
german democracy as we now know it in
the 21st century that they would have
paid
for their children to receive morality
lectures about what terrible people
their own parents and grandparents are
in many ways both subtle and coarse
government-created government-enforced
universe universal education
is constantly teaching us what terrible
people
our own parents and our own grandparents
were let's talk about student loans
right because right now one of the big
political issues
especially among the left right they
want to forgive the student loans
and they want to make college free right
that's like a big thing like we have all
these students
with all this debt and it's it's bad
which i agree
it's a terrible situation but what
the left doesn't want to accept is
responsibility
for creating the situation in the first
place
it is government's fault that all these
student loans exist
without government there would be no
student loans you know once upon a time
people didn't borrow money to go to
college nobody borrowed money to go to
college
you know around the 1960s once the 18
year olds could vote
here's what the politicians said to all
the 18 year olds
with democratic politicians they said
you know you shouldn't have to work
your summers you shouldn't have to have
jobs while you're in school
you should just be able to go to school
and enjoy yourself
and we're going to make it possible for
you to borrow money
to go to school by guaranteeing the
loans because normally
the bank wouldn't lend you any money
because you have no credit history you
have no assets
so you're not going to be able to get a
loan um once
the colleges saw that all these kids can
borrow money
to go to go to college well they were
like this is great i'm just going to
raise prices
so all of a sudden tuition started to go
up i mean for a long time
you can look back in the future in
history college tuition used to
be pretty stable it didn't go up very
much until the 60s
until the government really got involved
and so as soon as these colleges
saw that the kids had access to all this
money
they started jacking up prices i mean
any business
that could charge whatever the hell they
wanted because the government could
borrow the money
right if you had a restaurant where the
government was going to guarantee
to pay the bill of everybody who dined
there i mean the restaurant could
charge whatever it wanted
oh a hamburger is a thousand dollars oh
the government's going to pay yeah what
do you care
you know it's because people are paying
with their own money that they got to
keep the cost down
so if this theory were true
it would be equally true in the united
states of america
and japan it would be
equally true in the united states of
america
and germany
was the united states of america the
only country
in the last 70 years
to have an increasing role for the
government
in funding university education
no is the contrast between
the united states of america and germany
or the united states of america and
sweden denmark england taiwan
each an interesting and instructive case
is the contrast
between the united states of america and
these other countries that those other
countries had an unfettered
free market of education that avoided
bankrupting the students that avoided
creating this student loan crisis
and that only the united states of
america made this terrible decision
that he's describing to start allowing
banks to give loans to have the
government involved in guaranteeing
and encouraging bank loans to students
they're going to get
very simple empirical methods very
simple
comparative analysis is going to show
you quickly that the contrast in the
united states of america
and the countries of western europe
generally
is not a contrast between government
intervention
and the absence of government
intervention it's a contrast between
really bad government policies and
somewhat better
government policies but this man's
perspective on the world
absolutely cannot countenance cannot be
based on
cannot respond to empirical facts
he lives a life of a man of pure faith
it's a religious attitude that he's
adopted
he must close his eyes to the facts and
continue to believe
only in this abstract principle